Database Layer - Setup RDS
Steps to be Performed:

1- Create an RDS Instance
2- Connect to the RDS Database Using Bastion Host
3- Create the Database Schema

#1 Create an RDS Instance:

In this step, we'll configure an Amazon RDS MySQL instance using the free-tier option to serve as the database for your to-do list application.
You will also learn how to connect to it using a MySQL client. To do this—

Log in to the AWS Management Console
Go to the RDS Dashboard by searching for “RDS” in the AWS Console.
Create a New Database
Click on Create database to begin the setup.
Select Database Engine
Choose MySQL as the database engine. This is the database for your to-do list application.

Engine version: Choose the default MySQL version.
Template: Select Free Tier to ensure the instance is eligible for the AWS Free Tier.

Configure Database SettingsDB Instance Identifier: Enter a unique name for your database, such as todo-instance.
Master username: Choose a username (e.g., admin).
Master password: Create a strong password (note it down).
Confirm password: Re-enter the password.
Configure Instance Specifications
DB Instance Class: Keep it as default.
Set Up Connectivity

VPC: Select the VPC you created earlier (TodoAppVPC).
Subnet group: Choose a subnet group that includes your private subnets (this ensures the database will be accessible only from within the VPC).
Publicly Accessible: Select No (this ensures the database is not publicly accessible).
VPC Security Group: Select the security group you created earlier (TodoApp-Database-SG), allowing access from the application layer.

Create the Database
Click Create database to launch the instance. It will take a few minutes for the instance to be provisioned and available.

#2 Connect to the RDS Database Using Bastion Host:

Since your RDS instance is in a private subnet, you cannot directly connect to it from outside the VPC.
Instead, you will use a Bastion Host (an EC2 instance in a public subnet) to securely access the RDS instance.

1. Launch an EC2 Instance in the public subnet of your VPC. This instance will act as your Bastion Host.
Go to the EC2 Dashboard and click on Launch Instance.
Choose an appropriate Amazon Machine Image (AMI)— Amazon Linux 2.

Select an instance type (e.g., t2.micro for free tier eligibility).
In the Key-pair section, create a new Key pair and give a suitable name to it (For e.g. bastion-host-key). The bastion-host-key.pem file gets downloaded which can be used to SSH into the instances in the further steps
In the Network section, select your VPC and the public subnet where the Bastion Host will reside.
Make sure the Auto-assign Public IP option is enabled so that the Bastion Host can be accessed from the public internet.
For Security Group, you can choose the Webserver-SG
Leave the rest as defaults and click on Create Instance.

2. SSH into the Bastion Host
Once the EC2 instance is up and running, you can connect to it via SSH.
Open your terminal and use the following SSH command to connect to the Bastion Host.
python
ssh -i /path/to/your/key.pem ec2-user@<Bastion-Host-EIP>
Replace /path/to/your/key.pem with the actual path to your downloaded SSH key file, and <Bastion-Host-EIP> with the public IP of the Bastion Host.
Type yes when it asks— Are you sure you want to continue connecting.
You have successfully connected to a Bastion Host.

3. Install MySQL Client on the Bastion Host
To interact with your MySQL RDS instance, you need to install the MySQL client on the Bastion Host.
For Amazon Linux 2 (or similar):
python
sudo wget https://dev.mysql.com/get/mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm 
sudo dnf install mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm -y
sudo rpm --import https://repo.mysql.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-mysql-2023
sudo dnf install mysql-community-client -y

4. Connect to the RDS Instance from the Bastion Host
Now that you installed MySQL client on Bastion Host, you can securely connect to your RDS instance using the MySQL client.
Use the following command to connect:
python
mysql -h <RDS-endpoint> -P 3306 -u <master-username> -p
Replace <RDS-endpoint> with the RDS instance endpoint (e.g., todoappdb.xxxxxxxxxxx.us-east-1.rds.amazonaws.com).
Replace <master-username> with the username you selected during the RDS instance creation (e.g., admin).
After running the command, you will be prompted to enter the password for the master username. Enter the password you created earlier.
Once connected, you should see the MySQL prompt (mysql>). You can now execute SQL queries.


#3 Create the Database Schema
1. Access the Database
After successfully connecting to the RDS instance, create a new database for your application:

CREATE DATABASE TodoAppDB;
USE TodoAppDB;

2. Create the Tables
For your to-do list application, create the necessary tables. Here’s an example SQL statement for creating a Tasks table:

CREATE TABLE Tasks (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    task_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    task_description TEXT,
    due_date DATE NULL,
    completed BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE
);
